Copy-It-Right
The Distribution Religion:
The Media Archaeology of the Sandin Image Processor
Amanda Long
Independent Artist and Scholar
New York, United States
amandacamillelong@gmail.com

Abstract
How do artists store and organize hardware and software? I investigate the analog Sandin Image Processor
hardware using "zombie media" archaeology, examining
the concept of "obsolete" or "dead" media to find sustainable, socially equitable art and design solutions by remaking hardware modules as software. Because Sandin
shared the Copy-It-Right: The Distribution Religion
manual, more than 20 copies of the IP were made. As a
testament to the success of the IP community’s engagement and maintenance, the machines continue to operate
through the care of artists who actively engage the tool
for new projects. Sandin’s IP proposes preservation
through replication, re-implementation, open-access archives/storage, DIY activities, and community BuildIt/Fix-it parties. It represents an artist self-archiving and
organizing resources to copy-it-right.

In 2021, I began to research the Sandin IP and set out to
explore the possibilities of carrying on the spirit and ethos
of this earlier era by reconstructing the analog hardware as
digital software—to open the black box of image processing by tracing the genealogy of the analog imageprocessing techniques. Multiple Sandin IPs are still active
in private and public collections; artist Amy Karle, the
School of the Art Institute of Chicago and Alfred University maintain their own living IPs. To create my own living
IP requires a further step: a transformation to an opensource zombie media vessel.

Keywords
zombie media archaeology; open-source history; video
synthesizer; archive; digital cultural heritage; new media
art; global archiving network; ISEA, Summit on New Media Archiving

Introduction
Pioneering computer models such as Dan Sandin’s Image
Processor (IP) (1969–73) (figures 1 and 2) give users
agency and expose the invisible labor behind the mysterious inner workings—the black box—of image processing
and new media art archiving. Bruce Latour uses the term
“black box” to describe the obfuscation of time, labor, and
materials:
Look around the room. . . . Consider how many black
boxes there are in the room. Open the black boxes; examine the assemblies inside. Each of the parts inside the
black box is itself a black box full of parts. If any part
were to break, how many humans would immediately
materialize around each? How far back in time, away in
space, should we retrace our steps to follow all those silent entities that contribute peacefully to your reading
this chapter at your desk?[1]

Figure 1. Dan Sandin, 5 Minute Romp thru the IP (1973). This
DIY video introduced his Sandin IP and its capabilities to process
a live video in real time. Video still 5:58 min. ©Dan Sandin

From the point of view of new media art archiving
methodology, the Sandin IP offers a case study to find
solutions for new media art archiving. This case study may
be one of the strategies to overcome the existing archival
challenge. Multiple video synthesizers survive and thrive
because of the Distribution Religion vision Sandin employed centered on human interconnection and low- or nocost activities: community as a “resource,” open-source
sharing of intellectual property, artists’ self-archive, and
DIY activities. Terry Wong’s article “Global Archiving
Network: A Case Study at the Second Summit on New
Media Art Archiving at ISEA 2022,” states:

New media art is a contemporary-art category in which
the media itself is very technology-dependent. Artists often incorporate emerging technologies in their artworks
and constantly redefine the category. Unlike many other
more static traditional art media, this evolving genre of
art faces a severe problem: many recently created artworks can no longer be exhibited and may disappear
without a trace due to technology obsolescence, lack of
data, and insufficient documentation.[2]
Defying obsolescence, Sandin’s IP remains active after
50 years. Researching and replicating Sandin’s HIGH TEK
synthesizer led me to the black box keys of zombie media
archaeology. How do artists store and organize hardware
and software? Or how can a culture build lifespan into a
model with a vision wider than that of profit? To envision
the infrastructure for a new media art archive requires
looking at sustainable designs and art. The example of the
analog IP provides a confusing challenge: how to preserve
a video instrument, a high-technology invention with intricate parts and purposes. In attempting to remake the analog
hardware as digital software, I learned that Sandin’s IP
synthesizer lives on its users. Sandin emphasized community as the main energy “resource.” The relationships
formed foster a culture of support for high-technology,
nonhuman machines that require the delicate human hand
and creative mind to survive.
What is old or new? What is original or a copy? Who or
what is the average type or deviant? Foucault in The Archeology of Knowledge (1969) states that these dualisms,
old–new, original–traditional, average–deviant, become a
value judgment. In listening to Foucault’s appeal to reevaluate binary differences, Zombie Media conceptually stems
from media archaeology, a new materialist approach for
investigating technology. Hertz and Parikka state that
zombie media “is concerned with media that is not only out
of use, but resurrected to new uses, contexts and adaptations.”[3] My methodology investigates the analog Sandin
IP (IP) using “zombie media” archaeology to examine the
concept of “obsolete” or “dead” media to find sustainable,
socially equitable art and design solutions. As an artist
remaking the hardware modules as software 50 years later,
I believe the process could open artistic possibilities and
bend history. Hertz and Parikka describe how “assembled
into new constructions, such materials and ideas become
zombies that carry with them histories but are also reminders of the nonhuman temporalities involved in technical
media.”[4] Media and memory are interchangeable in that
the ideas need a vessel for storage and transfer. Silicon
Valley corporate software companies now start by building
a community of users, gaining the user’s contact information, and beginning a relationship of communication.
They set up a system in which the user is relevant and
central, but in contrast to the Sandin IP, with its community Build-It and Fix-it parties and the subsequent opensource model, they do not give the user agency with the
product they have purchased. The open-source model of
sharing and building community can become the common

model for challenging the communication systems that
now dominate. New media artists and archivists can benefit from the advice Sandin gave me in a Zoom interview
titled “Property Rites”; held to discuss the IP.
In that community-building adventure, [we] have this
“copy-it-right” idea that rather than trying to prevent
people from copying your stuff the best strategy was to
let them copy it and distribute it…expand its reach.[5]

Figure 2. Dan Sandin’s IP (1971–73). Note that the cables act as
“patches” between the modular analog computers that process the
video signal. Photo by Rosa Menkman, taken April 3, 2015, at the
School of the Art Institute of Chicago, where the IP operates to
this day. ©Wikipedia.

Figure 3. Amy Karle, BioFeedback (2011) performance, video
art. Installation view at Detroit Institute of the Arts. A zombie
resurrection for the Sandin IP with the artist Amy Karle performing and repurposing the Sandin IP. She maintains and operates
her own IP which was formerly artist Bob Synder's from Chicago.
Photo by Andre LaRoche. ©Amy Karle.

Do-It-Yourself
The IP, as Sandin explains in the live-recorded 1973 analog video 5 Minute Romp thru the IP, “is a general-purpose
analog computer, a general-purpose patch programmable
[computer], meaning [a] program [made] by patch ca-

bles.”[6] Sandin demonstrates the IP modules in real time
to the viewers, embodying a DIY spirit of how they, too,
can build a computer to process their moving images. The
IP manual, with the title and manifesto of the Distribution
Religion, details how Sandin’s project was simultaneously
an artistic, an engineering, and a political project designed
to broaden access to, interest in, and understanding of
image processing. Currently, the implications are reaching
out more broadly to new media art archiving. When this
DIY approach is applied now, it challenges the obfuscation
about artworks for replication and archival purposes.

Open-Source—The Distribution Religion
When video emerged as a medium in the late 1960s,
Sandin created the IP, a video synthesizer with analog
computer modules known as “open-source hardware.” He
designed its modules to be replicated by other artists as a
way of building community and disrupting the network of
communications under corporate control. As he explains,
“I wanted people to copy [the IP] because I figured that
was a better distribution mechanism than me trying to
create a company, which I was not interested in doing.”[7]
The IP, despite the name, was not intended to process still
images; Sandin’s concept was always for the IP to be a
video instrument in real time. With the arrival of the
Portapak video camera in the late 1960s, image processing
opened the floodgates of utopian thought and potential for
analog video technology.
An activist against the Vietnam War, Sandin was in
graduate school studying nuclear physics in 1968 when he
saw Scott Bartlett’s experimental film OffOn, of the same
year, which uses video processing. Deeply inspired, Sandin
built the IP in the subsequent five years. As the manager of
a particle accelerator, he operated wall-size generalpurpose analog computers. Applying the physics of the
particle accelerator technology to video required a prophetic conceptual leap, collaboration, and commitment. Sandin
explained to me, in our interview, that he discussed wanting a very powerful device for manipulating images with
fellow physicist Russ Dobson, asking, “What would it
mean to build the visual equivalent of a Moog Model Two
analog synthesizer?”[8] Dobson answered that first, you
needed to increase its bandwidth. The Moog had a 20–50
kilohertz bandwidth, whereas the IP went up to 5 megahertz because that was the bandwidth of a video channel.
The philosophy of reciprocity and generosity as it related to sharing intellectual property espoused a belief in the
coevolution of humans and machines, because independent
media relies on its hardware or software being robust,
accessible, and affordable. In Sandin’s model, the creator(s) share as much information as can be provided to the
users transparently. The Sandin IP hardware manual begins
with the heading “Distribution Religion.” The open-source
movement’s conceptual origins can be traced partly to the
capitalized text at the beginning of the IP’s 117-page DIY
manual on how to make the IP, a video art performance
instrument:

DISTRIBUTION RELIGION
THE IMAGE PROCESSOR MAY BE COPIED BY
INDIVIDUALS AND NOT-FOR-PROFIT
INSTITUTIONS WITHOUT CHARGE. FOR-PROFIT
INSTITUTIONS WILL HAVE TO NEGOTIATE FOR
PERMISSION TO COPY. I THINK CULTURE HAS TO
LEARN TO USE HIGH TEK MACHINES FOR
PERSONAL AESTHETIC, RELIGIOUS, INTUITIVE,
COMPREHENSIVE, EXPLORATORY GROWTH. THE
DEVELOPMENT OF MACHINES LIKE THE IMAGE
PROCESSOR IS A PART OF THE EVOLUTION. I AM
PAID BY THE STATE, AT LEAST IN PART, TO DO
AND DISSEMINATE THIS INFORMATION; SO I
DO.[9]
The introductory words attempt to facilitate cooperation,
collaboration, and exploration without exploitation. As he
stated, as a faculty member at a state university, Sandin
was paid by the state. He pointed to a strong connection
between scholars’ obligations to share their research and
open-access scholarly publishing made available by universities. The manifesto evokes a transcendentalist hope in
the spirit of self-learning and a belief in the symbiotic
relationship between humans and machines. It serves as an
ideology for teaching others to copy the designs for subverting capitalist cultural production using independent
media. The model challenges the ideology of planned obsolescence that is built into the economy. By opening the
IP’s black box, the “Distribution Religion” manual acts as
a force to expand proprietary hardware, software, and corporate control of video technology to include a world of
tinkerers and activists. It saw, in the early 1970s, the ability
to make, edit, and produce videos as essential to being
heard. As Sandin noted, “If you challenge capitalism, you
are going to lose . . .[It’s important] to be able to hack out a
methodology for yourself so you can do what you
want.”[10] Community was one of the most important
things about these ideas. The phrase “Copy-It-Right”
evolved to express the intention that people should copy
the software or hardware, because, says Sandin, “if you
don’t have anybody using it, your software is irrelevant.”[11] The goal was to increase exposure and build a
community. Asking people to “copy-it-right” and giving
them permission create a relationship between the creator
of the IP and the users. This could be true of any software
platform and its users if the creator(s) collect(s) the names
and contact information of users. However, as Sandin emphasizes, he also believes that intellectual property is essential for artists because it allows them to support themselves and not “pump gas.” He is part of a posthuman
movement to shift the labor of the means of production to
the user’s hands to enhance creativity and community
interconnection.

Community Building Adventures
Sandin describes the IP as “interactive installation art on
video signals.”[12] It was designed for use in a classroom

or lab to open up the space behind the screen for accessible
computer science and engineering education presented
through a hands-on STEAM project. At the heart of the
IP’s concept is the notion of intellectual property shared
cooperatively for the benefit of humanity, a philosophy
that also applies to the open-source movement. Thus, the
serves as a pioneering model of open-source activism. If an
artist who built the IP wrote to him with questions about
the complex circuit-building project, Sandin often answered, and he continues to do so. In return, he wanted
these users to share the video art they made using the by
mailing him a recording of it. Building and operating the
IP hardware inevitably came with wear-and-tear tech issues, resulting in repair or “Fix-it” sessions. Fix-it sessions
could be called parties, too, as Sandin describes them—
gatherings with pizza, beer, and friends—opportunities for
artists in the image-processing community to share tools
and expertise.

spirit of Sandin’s Distribution Religion, the Sandin IP
patch I have created is available to download and learn
from in GitHub; note that MaxMSPJitter programs are
nicknamed “patches” by the developers and users to continue the tradition. Zombie media archaeology professes
that “we need to develop similar circuit bending, art, and
activist practices as an analytical and creative methodology: hence the turn to archives in a wider sense that also
encompasses circuits, switches, chips, and other high-tech
processes.”[17] The digital Sandin IP project attempts to
“open the black box” at the heart of image processing and
modern data. What I aim to challenge is the binary logic of
capitalist thinking, which excludes the user while hiding
the invisible labor and environmental destruction behind
the circuits. The open-source sharing model offers an alternative vision of a symbiotic and posthuman world in
which the machines are us. Let’s tinker with new media
archiving. To build your own IP for your archive, visit
https://github.com/amandalong/Sandin-Image-Processor.

When you build a high-tech device, there has to be an
infrastructure to maintain it. . . . [It] all grew very naturally out of community . . . the community itself was the
resource that made all of the [gear we created and disseminated] work.[13]
Herein lies the difference he emphasized between isolating
corporate service maintenance contracts and what he and
his compatriots were doing: IP maintenance operated as a
group community activity, and, Sandin explained, “it was
very effective at keeping high technology alive.”[14]
Testament to the success of the IP community’s engagement and maintenance, the IP continues to operate
through the care of university labs such as Alfred, SAIC
and artists such as Amy Karle. The IP, unlike technology,
remains friendly to what Hertz and Parrika call a “black
box . . . a system that is not technically understood or accessed, and as a result these technologies are often completely unusable when they become obsolete or broken.”[15] Often, Fix-it parties were called “Build-it” parties or “Inauguration” parties. Building IP requires about a
hundred cables for patching because the process could be
challenging technically and the equipment pricey. Therefore, another type of “Fix-it” party would become a
“Build-it” session when Sandin borrowed the tools from
the television station at the University of Illinois at Chicago to work with a “production line” of IP users: artists
gathered to fabricate several hundred cables for each other
to patch the programmable modular computers together.[16]

The Original—Copy IP
The analog-computer-module logic has evolved into a
digital data-flow software program called MaxMSPJitter.1
Whereas Sandin made computer hardware to process video, I am using the IP’s hardware technology as the inspiration for developing open-source software (figure 4). In the
1

An open-source version, Pure Data, exists, too.

Figure 4. Amanda Long, screenshot of the Sandin software patch
draft with modules to match the physical analog modules and
cables. Note the digital symbolic representations of the analog
patch cable and modules. The graphic user interface GUI cannot
replicate the tactile, tangible interface joy of turning the dials and
plugging in the cables, but it does provide satisfying real-time
image processing aesthetics to mimic the analog Sandin IP.
©Amanda Long.

Acknowledgements
I thank Dan Sandin for inventing the IP and for his generosity of spirit in answering both technical and philosophical questions about the system. The Sandin IP “zapped a
hole” in my mind. Also, special thanks go to Amy Karle
for her interview about the Sandin IP and her advice to
connect to ISEA; and to William Rapaport for his writing
encouragement.

References
[1] Bruno Latour, Pandora’s Hope: Essays on the Reality of
Science Studies (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999),
185.
[2] Terry Wong, “Global Archiving Network: A Case Study at
the Second Summit on New Media Art Archiving at ISEA2022,”
16,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/366066485_ISEA2022_
Proceedings-of-the-Second-Summit-on-New-Media-ArtArchiving#fullTextFileContent.
[3] Garnet Hertz and Jussi Parikka, “Five Principles of Zombie
Media,” 429, accessed December 17, 2022,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/273062231_Five_Princi
ples_of_Zombie_Media.
[4] Hertz and Parikka, “Zombie Media: Circuit Bending Media
Archaeology into an Art Method,” Leonardo 45, no. 5 (2012):
429. https://www.jstor.org/stable/41690216.
[5] Dan Sandin, interview with Amanda Long via Zoom, “Property Rites,” 0:02–0:38. Descript audio,
https://share.descript.com/view/ZU02PDqJJqe.
[6] Dan Sandin, 5 Minute Romp thru the IP, 1973, YouTube
video, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8qh6jRzjmcY.
Dan Sandin later shared his version, which has a different ending,
https://vimeo.com/663928209.
[7] Sandin interview, “Property Rites,” 11:16–11:21.
[8] Sandin interview, “Property Rites,” 01:05:17–21.
[9] Dan Sandin and Phil Morton, Distribution Religion (Image
Processor manual), February 28, 1976 (with handwritten notes
from October 1978), page 3.
http://www.criticalartware.net/DistributionReligion/DistributionR
eligion.pdf.
[10] Sandin interview, “Radical Architecture,” 33:52.
[11] Sandin interview, “Radical Architecture,” 58:41.
[12] Sandin interview, “Property Rites,” 01:23:42.
[13] Sandin interview “Radical Architecture,” 28:42–50, 32:52–
33:01.
[14] Sandin interview, “Radical Architecture,” 36:52–37:04.
[15] Hertz and Parikka, “Zombie Media,” 428.
[16] Sandin interview, “Radical Architecture,” 28:57.
[17] Hertz and Parikka, “Zombie Media,” 429–30.

Author Biography
Amanda Long is a video sculptor, animator, mirror maker, lover
of the Earth and Sun and the animals, and a dreamer of fairy-tale
visions. She fantasizes about giving technology a soul and making peace between humans and nature. Long’s artworks enable
their viewers to share the role of being an artist by being active
participants. She wants the artwork to be a type of “reclamation,”
to offer people a sense of power over how they are represented on
camera and over the space in which the artwork is shown. Her
installations include Silly Faces aka Strike a Pose, National Portrait Gallery, Smithsonian, Washington, D.C. (2016); Wishing
Well, Dyckman Farmhouse Museum, New York City (2016); and
Portal at Socrates Sculpture Park, New York City (2014). A
second installation of Silly Faces and an Animation Station
opened at the Katara Children’s Mall, Doha, Qatar, in fall 2022.

